Ring doc (#3486)
grafana/loki: docs/sources/architecture/ring.md

---
title: Ring
weight: 1000
---

# Ring

This document builds upon the information in the [Loki Architecture](./) page

It explains what exactly is the ring, what problem does it solve and how it actually works.

We use ring in Distributor and Ingester components of Loki.

> Loki in microservice mode usually can have multiple ingesters and distributors. This multiple instances of same component(ingester or distributor) forms a ring (more presicisly Consisten Hash Ring).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Loki in microservice mode usually can have multiple ingesters and distributors. This multiple instances of same component(ingester or distributor) forms a ring (more precisely Consistent Hash Ring).
```

Reviewer: I think ingester forms a ring not distributors, distributors knows about the ring (to send data correctly) and which ingester hold which tokens from the hash ring.

That's my view of it though.

Author: I think distributor also has its own ring. At least that's what I see. 

https://github.com/grafana/loki/blob/master/pkg/distributor/distributor.go#L70-L76

> Both distributors and ingesters have their own ring. Write path looks like Client -> Distributors (ring) -> Ingesters (ring). Read path looks like Client -> Querier -> Ingesters (ring).

Reviewer: Not sure what do you mean by.

> Both distributors and ingesters have their own ring.

Author: I actually mean two separate rings for distributor and ingestor.

distributor - https://github.com/grafana/deployment_tools/pull/8186
ingestor - https://github.com/grafana/loki/blob/master/pkg/ingester/ingester.go#L52

Reviewer: I see but there's not all hashring. It seems that you explain hashring here. At least I would focus on ring type to avoid confusion.

## The Problem

Loki aggregates incoming log lines into something called Log stream. Log stream is just a set of logs associated with a single tenant and a unique labelset(key value pairs).

> Here is the problem, say I have large number of log streams coming in and I have a bunch of Loki servers(can be ingesters or distributors). Now I want to distribute these log streams across the servers in a way I can find it later when I want to read back the log stream. Here is the tricky part. I want to do this without any global directory or lookup service.

Reviewer: This could be rephrase a bit. The technical assumptions are correct.

> So basically, we are talking problem of distribuing the log streams "deterministically"!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So basically, we are talking problem of distributing the log streams "deterministically"!
```

Problem is simple if all I have is single Loki server. Solution is send all logs into that single server. But having multiple servers makes the problem bit tricky

Another way to solve this problem is via hashing. We assign an integer to the servers (say 0, 1, 2, 3.. etc) and we hash our log stream (labelset + tenantID) to integer value 'h' and handover it to the server with the value 'h%n' where n is the max server.

> Interestingly, this approach solves some of the problem we have, say same log stream goes to same server (because same set of labels + tenant gives same hash value), and while reading, we can hash it back to find the server where its value is stored.

Reviewer 2: > and while reading, we can hash it back to find the server where its value is stored.

I wouldn't mention this because we don't actually perform this optimization. It's very difficult to do as it _changes_ when the ring membership changes. To get around this, we query all ingesters.

> But this solution lacks some scaling properties. Say if we introduce new server or remove existing server (intentionally or unintentially) then every single log stream will map to different server now.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But this solution lacks some scaling properties. Say if we introduce new server or remove existing server (intentionally or unintentially) then every single log stream may map to different server now.
```

There are several better approach to solve this problem. One of the approach we use in Loki is Consistent Hashing.

## How it works

Distributors use consistent hashing in conjunction with a configurable replication factor to determine which instances of the ingester service should receive a given stream.

> Each ingester belongs to a single hash ring. This hash ring stored in Consul is used to achieve consistent hashing;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each ingester holds a subset of tokens within the hash ring. This hash ring stored in Consul is used to achieve consistent hashing;
```

> Every ingester (also distributor) that is part of the ring has two things associated with it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every ingester  that is part of the ring has two things associated with it.
```

Reviewer: see for distributors we store rate limits, not tokens.

- State
- Set of tokens they own

State can be one of the following
- PENDING
- JOINING
- ACTIVE
- LEAVING
- UNHEALTHY

> The state ACITVE may receive both read and write requests. While state JOINING can receive only write requests, the state LEAVING may receive read requests.

Reviewer 3: just typo: ACITVE vs ACTIVE

Each token is a random unsigned 32-bit number.

When doing a hash lookup, distributors only use tokens for ingesters who are in the appropriate state for the request.

To do the hash lookup, distributors find the smallest appropriate token whose value is larger than the hash of the stream. When the replication factor is larger than 1, the next subsequent tokens (clockwise in the ring) that belong to different ingesters will also be included in the result.

The effect of this hash set up is that each token that an ingester owns is responsible for a range of hashes (hence load is distributed more evenly across the instances). If there are three tokens with values 0, 25, and 50, then a hash of 3 would be given to the ingester that owns the token 25; the ingester owning token 25 is responsible for the hash range of 1-25.

Token is same as virtual node (or vnode) in consistent hashing.

> Number of tokens per ring is configurable via `--ingester.num-tokens`. Default is 128

Author: Q: why can't we have it configurable for distributors?

Reviewer: because distributors are not part of the ring :)

Author: I think distributor also has its own ring. At least that's what I see.

https://github.com/grafana/loki/blob/master/pkg/distributor/distributor.go#L70-L76

### Quorum consistency
Since all ingesters share access to the same hash ring, write requests can be sent to any ingester.

To ensure consistent query results, Loki uses Dynamo-style quorum consistency on reads and writes. This means for example that the distributor will wait for a positive response of at least one half plus one of the ingesters to send the sample to before responding to the client that initiated the send.

### Ring Status page

> If Loki is run in microservice mode, both ingester and distributor exposes their ring status via the endpoint `api/v1/ruler/ring`

Reviewer 2: This endpoint is only the ruler ring. The ingester ring is stored at `/ring` and that's the one I'd mention here. Followup: we should really expose all the rings on their own endpoints.

> ### Other uses of consistent hashing.

Reviewer 2: This is not actually true. We use the _index_ to find the chunks. Chunks are content addressed to _de-amplify_ writes: there's no need to store `replication_factor` identical chunks if their contents are the same. Content addressing helps ensure this.
